---
title: "Teaching Assistant for BIOL 428: Mammalogy"
collection: teaching
type: "Teaching Mammalogy"
permalink: /teaching/2015-BIOL-428
venue: "Washington State University, Department of Biological Sciences"
date: 2015-08-01
location: "Pullman, WA"
---

Course Description
======
This course is intended as an introduction to the biology of mammals. My goal is to provide you with information on many aspects of mammalian biology, to introduce you to the kind of research that is currently being done in mammalogy, and to familiarize you with local mammals. We will survey the structure and function of mammals, and their evolutionary adaptations to a variety of environments and life styles. The course will also examine the behavior, ecology, and conservation status of mammals. The lecture and lab are very complementary, and should be considered as a unit. In lecture we will cover the biology of mammals of the world, and in lab you will learn about every mammal in Washington State.

Role and Responsibilities
======
Responsibilities as a TA for BIOL 428: Mammalogy at Washington State University in the laboratory included creating and giving weekly lectures on the lab, setting up labs, creating and administering lab entry and exit quizzes, creating in-lab activity worksheets, guiding students through the lab activities, grading lab assignments and quizzes, and answering questions relating to the lab activities. Outside of laboratory responsibilities included answering questions related to lecture, creating exams, proctoring exams and grading in class exams.
